---
layout: post
title: ClojureBridge Berlin, second edition
author: Arne Brasseur
twitter: plexus
---

*Arne Brasseur is one of the organisers of ClojureBridge Berlin, which Travis Foundation has supported since their first workshop.*

---

It's a wintery Friday evening in Berlin. Most office workers have left the
building, ready to grab a drink, or heading home to curl up in front of a movie,
but this particular office is buzzing with activity.

We're at [ClojureBridge](http://clojurebridge-berlin.github.io/), a free
programming workshop for women who want to get a taste of tech with the Clojure
programming language. Tonight is the installation party. People coming in from
the cold are greeted with a name tag, a notebook, and a warm bowl of soup. There
are thirty-six of them, all enthusiastic and eager to learn.

A few of the coaches go around with USB sticks, making sure people's laptops
have the necessary software to dive right in the next day. Once
your laptop is set up you get a green dot on your name tag, and you can take the
rest of the time to get to know your fellow students and coaches.

There are a few small hurdles, a Windows laptop set to Korean, a Mac with an
outdated version of OS X, but we've chosen tools that are generally hassle free
to install, and by 9pm we're starting to wrap up. Time to get some sleep, it'll
be a long day tomorrow!

## Increasing Diversity One Step At a Time

The roots of ClojureBridge go back to 2009, when the first RailsBridge workshop
was held in San Francisco. The local Rails community at the time was
overwhelmingly male, something the RailsBridge organizers sought to remedy by
reaching out to women directly.

Since then RailsBridge workshops have been held the world over. In 2012
[Bridge Foundry](http://bridgefoundry.org/) was created as an umbrella
organization for projects focused on making technology more accessible to people
who are underrepresented in tech. A number of spin-off workshops have taken the
RailsBridge blueprint and applied it to other technologies. These include
MobileBridge, GoBridge, and since 2014: ClojureBridge.

## Kicking Into Gear

By morning a fresh layer of snow covers the sidewalks, and we get to enjoy the
view from the 6th floor Wunderlist office over a cup of coffee, fresh bagels,
and vegan muffins. We start off with a presentation about the what and why of
ClojureBridge, and give an overview of what is scheduled for the day. Afterwards
people split up in eleven groups. Each group is supported by two coaches, and
together they start working their way through the curriculum.

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="6" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:50.0% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAAGFBMVEUiIiI9PT0eHh4gIB4hIBkcHBwcHBwcHBydr+JQAAAACHRSTlMABA4YHyQsM5jtaMwAAADfSURBVDjL7ZVBEgMhCAQBAf//42xcNbpAqakcM0ftUmFAAIBE81IqBJdS3lS6zs3bIpB9WED3YYXFPmHRfT8sgyrCP1x8uEUxLMzNWElFOYCV6mHWWwMzdPEKHlhLw7NWJqkHc4uIZphavDzA2JPzUDsBZziNae2S6owH8xPmX8G7zzgKEOPUoYHvGz1TBCxMkd3kwNVbU0gKHkx+iZILf77IofhrY1nYFnB/lQPb79drWOyJVa/DAvg9B/rLB4cC+Nqgdz/TvBbBnr6GBReqn/nRmDgaQEej7WhonozjF+Y2I/fZou/qAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/BA39OS1B5zJ/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">Breakfast is served! #goodmorning #ClojureBridge</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by ClojureBridge Berlin (@clojurebridge_berlin) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2016-01-23T08:09:27+00:00">Jan 23, 2016 at 12:09am PST</time></p></div></blockquote>

We teach the basics of Clojure: simple values, data structures, functions, and
after that move on to creating algorithmic drawings with a system called Quil.
Clojure is fairly minimal as far as programming languages go, so a day is enough
to work your way through the basics, and still have time left to play around
with what you have learned.

Most of the attendees are absolute beginners, but some already have programming
experience in another language, or they may have done a bit of Clojure in the
past and now want to dig deeper. We try to match up groups by skill level, and
then it's up to the coaches to see where the group wants to go.

Everyone is encouraged to take regular breaks. There's also a quiet room where
people can go to withdraw from the buzz for a bit. Finally after an initial
three hours of coding, lunch is served. The food is healthy and delicious. All
those hard working brains have given people an appetite, and soon most of it is
finished. We all gather around the projector again for the first slot of
lightning talks: short presentations to help people get inspired. And after that
it's coding time again.

## The Official Bits: Dealing With Finances

Food, notebooks, little things like name tags and pens, these all cost money.
Luckily more and more companies are understanding the need for 
pro-diversity initiatives, and so with a bit of effort we found a good number of
sponsors to help us out financially. However, as a small and informal group of
volunteers getting that money isn't always so easy. We don't have our own bank
account or accountant, we can't write out invoices or receipts.

This is where Travis Foundation comes in. They have been a tremendous help
dealing with finances. Companies sponsor us by donating to the foundation, for
which they get an official receipt. Because Travis Foundation is a registered
non-profit in Germany these receipts can be used for tax declaration and
accounting purposes. Finally Travis Foundation refunds our expenses.

## A Community Effort

The Clojure community in Berlin is still somewhat small, but it's tight-knit and
growing quickly. Each month there is a Clojure Dojo where people meet and
present their Clojure related topics and projects. A year or two back only a
handful of people would be there on any given month, but nowadays we regularly
have thirty to fourty people showing up. This grassroots base is important, it's
where we find most of our volunteers and coaches, without them these workshops
would not be possible.

A small but committed team started the Berlin chapter of ClojureBridge early
2015, and we held our first workshop last summer. Afterwards attendees were
invited to continue their learning at a weekly project group. After a few false
starts we now have a committed core group of students and coaches showing up
every Wednesday evening to do Clojure together. Thanks to this initiative a few
attendees from the previous workshop were coaches at the latest workshop, which
is extremely validating.

Having a good synergy between these three initiatives, the monthly Clojure Dojo,
the workshops, and the project group is thoroughly enriching. We could not do
all of this without the contributions of many dozens of people. I highly
encourage you to come and meet this friendly and welcoming community.

## Wrapping Up

It's past five, the sun is setting, but people are still fully absorbed in their
coding. We go around and nudge them to start wrapping up. Everyone gathers
around again, and a few more coaches present lightning talks, giving people some
food for thought to take home.

And then, the big finale: demo time! It's always amazing what people can achieve
in less than a day. At ClojureBridge we don't focus too much on "job market"
skills like web development, but instead pay attention to getting the
fundamentals right, and to having fun. People learn real Clojure programming, a
skill they can apply to a variety of tasks, but they also get to be creative by
coding up quirky graphics and animations. Nothing is more motivating than simply
having a good old time.

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="6" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:50.0% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAAGFBMVEUiIiI9PT0eHh4gIB4hIBkcHBwcHBwcHBydr+JQAAAACHRSTlMABA4YHyQsM5jtaMwAAADfSURBVDjL7ZVBEgMhCAQBAf//42xcNbpAqakcM0ftUmFAAIBE81IqBJdS3lS6zs3bIpB9WED3YYXFPmHRfT8sgyrCP1x8uEUxLMzNWElFOYCV6mHWWwMzdPEKHlhLw7NWJqkHc4uIZphavDzA2JPzUDsBZziNae2S6owH8xPmX8G7zzgKEOPUoYHvGz1TBCxMkd3kwNVbU0gKHkx+iZILf77IofhrY1nYFnB/lQPb79drWOyJVa/DAvg9B/rLB4cC+Nqgdz/TvBbBnr6GBReqn/nRmDgaQEej7WhonozjF+Y2I/fZou/qAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/BA5A96PG-09/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">As usual too tired/shy to demo my workshop project. So, media transfer! Thanks so much @clojurebridge_berlin!</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A video posted by Lucie (@autofocus) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2016-01-23T18:01:24+00:00">Jan 23, 2016 at 10:01am PST</time></p></div></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en-gb"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Created generative art at a <a href="https://twitter.com/ClojureBridgeDe">@ClojureBridgeDe</a> workshop.Thanks to the organizers &amp; coaches <a href="https://twitter.com/franschm">@franschm</a> &amp; <a href="https://twitter.com/igorwhilefalse">@igorwhilefalse</a> <a href="https://t.co/5OJBFgjGVF">pic.twitter.com/5OJBFgjGVF</a></p>&mdash; Ellen König (@ellen_koenig) <a href="https://twitter.com/ellen_koenig/status/690982000946208768">January 23, 2016</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en-gb"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Had a wonderful day <a href="https://twitter.com/ClojureBridgeDe">@ClojureBridgeDe</a> thanks to all the sponsors, organisers and amazing coaches! <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/quil?src=hash">#quil</a> <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/clojure?src=hash">#clojure</a> <a href="https://t.co/NF1qDM3A5L">pic.twitter.com/NF1qDM3A5L</a></p>&mdash; Nynne Christoffersen (@nynnest) <a href="https://twitter.com/nynnest/status/691199529127952384">January 24, 2016</a></blockquote>

The workshop is over. People's faces show both excitement and exhaustion. There
is still a lot of of food left, so people are invited to stick around and help
us finish it, or if they prefer they can go out and find dinner among
themselves. Afterwards organizers, coaches, and students all gather again at a
bar nearby for a much deserved drink. Everyone seems to agree it was a success.
After months of preparation we can see the results of our efforts, and we can
start thinking about the next event.


_To stay informed about future events you can subscribe to the [ClojureBridge Berlin mailing list](http://eepurl.com/bOa5Yr), or you can follow them on Twitter ([@ClojureBridgeDE](https://twitter.com/ClojureBridgeDE)) and Instagram ([@clojurebridge_berlin](https://instagram.com/clojurebridge_berlin)). See you at the next event!_

![ClojureBridge 2016 group photo](/images/blog/2016-01-28-clojurebridge-group.jpg)
<em>ClojureBridge Berlin, second edition</em>


<script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>